Okay, so we're talking to Edna O'Brien.
This novel, I guess, is inspired by an actual case.
Is that correct?
Not quite, no.
The seed of it was perhaps sparked off in my mind, but it was not inspired by it for a very simple reason.
First of all, the ex-case, I mean, we'll talk about the ex-case right now.
It was a case that the whole world was up in arms about and felt very strongly about, as did I. But it was a girl in the city, and she was pregnant by a friend of her father's.
And she went to England to have an abortion, and the attorney generally recalled the parents' home when she was underage.
And I, of course, read it and was very shocked and sorry for everyone in it.
I couldn't, however, write a book, no one could, what they're sold, just from a newspaper article.
There would have to be an inner momentum for reason.
which would be quite independent.
And because I always write about the country, my story is set in the country, A, and B, it's an incest story, which is a much more, you know, perhaps it's prevalent.
It's not, I didn't do it or wouldn't do it for the sake of the sensation.
I did it because it was something, whatever the word is, resonating there in me for many years to write about.
But I wasn't ready to write about it.
You're not ready to write any book until you write it.
Of course, but incest.
It's amazing how this theme has really... Did you find it frustrating that there are a lot of books dealing in various degrees with incest?
There are, but you know, one writes by oneself in a faraway country, and I'm a little bit aware of it now in different books out.
But that, again, would be something just accidental.
I wrote this book.
It took me three years to write, so I started it three years ago.
There was an interview, I think you did with the New York Times, where you suggested that this might be the second book of the trilogy.
Is that the case?
Yes, that's the case.
One is The House of Spended Isolation, which is about an IRA man on the run in Ireland, in the South.
and he takes a woman hostage.
It's that story.
I don't know if you've read it or not.
I know the book.
Yeah.
And Down by the River is about, well, a girl who has her father's, who's carrying a child, her father's, who's admired you.
Stranded in every sense, psychologically.
I'm just going to put this closer to you.
Okay.
This way, this way.
Oh, yes.
Do they worry?
I think it's buried.
It's just right there.
Sure.
Don't worry about that.
And a third book, which I will be beginning, please God, when I go home after all these journeys, is again prompted, I would think, more than inspired would be the word, by something that happened.
A murder of a land.
People in the country especially
are very possessive of and deeply cling to their bits of land, you know, even if it's only a field as big as that armchair.
And it will be the third book.
It's called Wild Decembers, from a poem of Emily Brontes, Fifteen Wild Decembers.
And there will be my story
of the island in the end of this century, the kind of the pulse of things that happen there, especially in the country, because I write about the country and I'm from the country.
So did you visualize a trilogy?
Did I visualize?
Did you visualize three parts to the story?
Well, I didn't at first because writing is a little bit like sleepwalking.
You don't really know what you're doing except you move.
You move into a strange, both to a strange and unknown path.
I didn't realize it when, four or five years ago, when I sat down to write House of Splendid Isolation.
But it just seemed to me one, in a way, arose out of the other.
You've learned most of your adult life in London, I guess, is that right?
Away from Ireland, certainly.
No, that's a bit of a fallacy, but, you know, people read one thing and then they think that's the truth.
No, I live sometimes in London.
and quite a lot in Ireland.
And I spend a good bit of time, and will be spending more even in New York, because I'm going to teach at NYU.
So I'll be, you know, I've always come to New York, almost always as what's known as a visitor, but I'll be there as a, well, living there next year.
I like, I like actually, it's strange, I like to move around a bit because
For writing you have to have privacy.
Now you can have that anywhere.
You can have it in a city just as much as in the country.
But what it mainly entails is you can't have much of a social life.
It's ironic that writers are supposed to depict the human condition.
and at the same time they have to be helmets.
Very funny.
Kind of a paradox, isn't it?
Yes, yes, yes.
Do you consider yourself an ex-patriot writer then?
No, I don't go in for those words to tell you the truth.
I'm just a writer whose stories are always founded or rooted in my native land.
But you mentioned earlier that on the one hand you're expected to describe the human condition while being expected to withdraw from it.
Do you find that distance does sharpen your perception of that?
Distance always sharpens perception, but distance can be, just as Emily Dickinson would be the first to admit, just going into a room.
You don't have to geographically go a million miles away or to another lassitude.
I think what a writer has to be, or what one becomes, is ever watchful of every place, every sensation, every smell, every sound.
And when you're there in a place, of course, they renew themselves into your mind and into your memory.
To actually write, I wrote some of Down by the River in England.
I wrote some of it in the west of Ireland.
I wrote some of it, well, back and forth.
Is human nature a constant, in your view?
I mean, you're writing about Ireland.
You mean a constant, a universal.
Oh, yes.
Oh, sure.
I mean, the fact... The only reason why I write... Well, yes, I would say that the most...
fundamental reason that I write about Ireland it's the place I know if I set a story in Boston or Vermont or anywhere else it wouldn't have that inner authenticity Hemingway said a very intelligent thing once he said you have to know everything and then you have to just select a few things to put in and it's not just the dialogue and the ear for the rhythms of the speech it's the
It's the landscape.
It's the cultural, psychological ethos.
It's the history.
It's everything.
Now, you were a bandwriter in your homeland at one point.
I was, yes.
I'm fascinated by this whole experience.
I've been interviewed with Andre Brink a couple months ago.
Of course, he was banned in South Africa for years.
Who is this?
Andre Brink, the South African writer.
And he said, you know, to be banned in your own, all of a sudden you're a writer without a reader, in a very definite sense.
Did you ever feel that way?
Wasn't he saying we're a lot... To be banned, he said, you are a writer without a reader, essentially speaking, in your homeland, at least, which was the reason he started to write in English and not just Afrikaans, you know?
Sure.
Well, it has many repercussions, yes.
It makes one, or did to me at the time, feel secretly that I must have done something wrong, that there was some criminality.
Something wrong in a true moral sense, you think?
Well, that there was a criminality in what I did.
And maybe there is a criminality in any writing that's any good.
It doesn't necessarily... When you said you have no readers, the trouble, I think, with present time, and something I deeply regret and lament, is actually that there are not a lot of readers, whether you're banned or unbanned, because the...
the passion and habit of reading, I think, is diminished.
It's reduced greatly.
People go to rock concerts or look at videos or look at television, so that maybe a bit of banning stirs up.
Maybe it's helpful.
What I think, though, the deepest cut about it is being misunderstood or punished by your own people.
whom you have written about, not to parody them or humiliate them.
I think that hurts.
That hurts, yes, because it's short-sighted.
I guess you must have an idea of who you're writing for.
Are you writing for the reader in Ireland as well as the reader here?
I never have an idea.
If you had, you'd go off your head.
First of all, every single person.
that might read my book in Ireland would respond to it differently.
It's almost as if it would be a different book.
I write for it, what Kierkegaard called the purity of heart.
No, you could.
I mean, which reader in Ireland would you be thinking of?
A schoolteacher, a doctor, a nurse, a teenager, a hippie?
A Protestant.
Oh, sure.
No, but I don't think like that.
It would be counterproductive.
Which of them would want to get to?
No, I write about people who I hope have a resonance for readers wherever they be.
Whether they're in Finland or in Buffalo or...
You have been quoted as saying that when you write your fiction in particular, you do tend to gravitate towards the darker side.
Is that an accurate quote?
I think I like dark things, whether they're by men or women.
Most of the greater Shakespeare plays are dark, the tragedies and the histories.
Golgoth is dark.
Yes, I'm dark, but very...
Very glad to be.
How would you define the arc?
Well, to try and depict the deepest recesses of human nature.
The turmoil, the torment, the ambiguity, the fear.
All that would be what one would call deep.
But the superficial writing is like, well, there's plenty of it.
We don't have to dwell on it.
We all know who they are.
I'm sorry, I had an idea there for a question.
Don't worry.
Take your time.
It was a very good question, too.
I'm sure I'll come back.
Doesn't it drive you crazy when you have something you're going through?
I know.
It will come.
If you want to be quiet, then be silent.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no.
You visited Joyce's grave.
I read that.
Do you make literary told images?
I do.
And I guess do you take inspiration?
Now we can really use the word inspiration, I think, properly.
Well, I love Joyce.
He's my master.
He and Faulkner are my two masters.
Faulkner.
They're the ones I read every day of my life.
I happened to be in Zurich and I went to see Joyce's grave and it was quite comic.
It was a bottle of empty Guinness bottle and one dyed green carnation that someone must have brought from a St.
Patrick's Day thing just thrown on the grave and it was very near the zoo.
You could hear the baying of the lions or tigers and I thought Joyce who was very
susceptible to sound, and who dreaded thunder.
He was very frightened of thunder, and of animals, but this constant animal sound, like a kind of mantra.
And there was nobody there at all.
It was a quiet day.
I haven't visited many shrines.
I haven't been to Faulkner's Mississippi.
the inspiration really comes from their work, not from... I was pleased to go to Joyce's grave, and I was... I thought a comic.
That's a wonderful story.
A moment out of Ulysses, Leopold Bloom, you know, the empty Guinness bottle, and the old worn incarnation.
Oh, I know there are so many people like myself to just touch a manuscript.
Ah, that's different.
I saw the handwritten...
manuscript in the National Library in Dublin of Portrait.
And to actually read, and I knew it, I know the text very well, to actually read the words they had for me definitely, whether it was induced or whether it was actually a reality.
They had a palpable effect.
It was the moment in Portrait where
The little boy, Stephen, is in Clongos and he's having a bout of nostalgia.
And he's thinking of his mother at home with her felt slippers and her feet inside the fender.
And it was just that little bit they let me look at for a few minutes.
And I did feel that it carried much more emotion reading it with his handwriting.
He had very pen, spidery handwriting.
than it was the printed book.
Well, the printed book always, always is going to read differently, isn't it?
That's one of these things with books, if they come to us at some point over computer screens, they'll never be the same.
The perception, I think, changes.
It has to have a page, don't you think so?
Yeah, absolutely.
Or it will be a tragedy if they can.
I think I know what I was going to ask you earlier.
Good.
about and of course when i said inspired by that was clearly the wrong word because it was sparked off a bit it was sparked up because what you did was create a novel which we should absolutely point out is a gripping gripping read i mean and and it does it and maybe we could talk a little bit about how a novel does take on a life of its own indeed it does it takes on when you start i always start with the first few lines
In any book and in visits ahead of them the road lay in a long entwined undulation of mud, patched tar and fjords of green.
The grassy surfaces rutted and trampled with the young shoots urgent in the sun, flower and flowering weed in full regalia, a carnival sight.
And I wanted to start to cast, if you like, a kind of spell of...
lushness and beauty, beauty of nature, and yet something within it, a warning of something dark and dangerous.
When it says, they walk away, the father and daughter, and the sound of the traffic growing fainter and fainter at Clackety River beyond.
And in the odd gusts of wind, the undersides of the larches showing up like ballroom skirts of spun silver, the road, their road, silent, trombolant, yet with a speech of its own, speaking back to them, father and child, through trappings of sun and fretted verdure, speaking of the old mutinous, and a fresh cry mounting in the blood,
So that, if I begun with like the fresh cry mounting and the blood scenario, it would be no, it would, you have to build, you have to, in the best sense of the word, enchant the reader.
What was the word again?
Enchant the reader.
So, yes, you make a novel but, and you also hope to create a whole world.
It's not just a girl and her father and this story, it's the whole community.
It's the lies and the hypocrisies and the half, the betrayals and then the friendships, the different things that people have composed of.
You know, it's so strange how people... There's a proverb in the north of England that's very funny.
Northern people say it.
It's even funnier.
I'm about to sneeze.
They say there's not so queer as folk, meaning there's nothing as strange as people.
So you have to create that world of the world of, in this book, Down by the River, the world of judiciary, the judges, the guards, the religious people in that community who are both
religious and also compassionless.
The pro-life, the pro-choice, just the whole caboodle.
You mentioned creating a world and you also mentioned how
how great an admirer you are of the works of Faulkner.
Yes.
And I wonder, this is a multi-layered question, number one, are you creating a world not unlike Yokneputapu County on the one hand... Well, I would like to think I am, yes, yes.
I keep to the same place in Ireland, in my fiction, as I'm talking about.
And it has, somebody reviewing this book, two people actually said,
remarked on it, having some of the fervour and some of the words of Faulkner.
And I think the resemblance would be that the turbulence, the constant of turbulence and rooted.
Faulkner talked about the blood boiling through the land.
What a wonderful image.
I feel the same about the Ireland that I know, which is different to the Ireland that another Irish writer might know or write about.
Very different.
Very.
You've probably read other Irish writers contemporary as well.
I just did an interview with Seamus Dean, as a matter of fact.
Yes, Seamus Dean's book, which people liked very much, Reading in the Dark.
It's very different.
I have no trouble doing two Irish writers in the strength of the two books.
Entirely different books.
You see what I mean?
Completely different universe, even though it's the same country.
Because it's the sense in the end.
It's a good example, actually, isn't it?
Because you are so different.
In the end, it's the sensibility of the writer that selects.
chooses, distorts, metamorphosizes, you name it, that world to bring it to the page.
For instance, in another way, you could put it like this, the Dublin that James Joyce created, both in Dubliners, in portrait, and above all, in Ulysses.
It's not Dublin.
It's Joyce's Dublin and it's more real to me than the Dublin I lived in and worked in and got on and off buses in and fell in love in and wept in and so on.
And that's what literature does.
That's what Faulkner does.
That's what Joyce does.
They totally create a fictional, mythical
totally convincing archetypal world that happens also to bear some relation to a real world.
But you have to have the two.
Unless you have the archetypal reach or breadth, the books are short-lived.
And that is the power of fiction as we approach the end of the century, wouldn't you say?
Absolutely.
Do you have anxiety about the future of the novel?
I mean, if it is able to continue doing...
the kinds of things you just described?
I do.
I think, to tell you the truth, there's an awful lot of clever books, you know.
And a book has to have soul as well as brilliance.
And soul is the feeling.
I'm sure from countries that we know nothing about,
I'm sure there are women and men in parts of Africa that have great stories to tell and great language in which to tell them, but we don't know about them.
I think the kind of Western, slightly... A lot of Western fictions are slightly jaded.
You know, they're...
A writer I do admire, an American writer I admire, who creates or recreates, whatever the word is, a landscape, is Cormac McCarthy.
I admire him.
Beckett said a great thing once about writing vis-a-vis James Joyce.
He said, it's very easy writing.
He was ironic.
Very easy.
He said, it's just making the words do the work.
And Cormac McCarthy...
The words do the work, yes.
I admire his work.
I can see in it some real bravura as well, and I like that.
He really has arrived, hasn't he, after so many years of people's, you know, an overnight success after 20 years of trying.
Yes, well, it's a restless and careless world, and you don't, you know, there's so many books.
Everyone clamoring, every publisher, every, you know, every publishing house.
And also there's that terrible thing called fashion.
Certain kinds of writing more fashionable than others.
You have to stay the course.
The horse that stays the course is the... The one who wins, inevitably.
You quoted also, I hate to throw these quotes at you, but they certainly captured my attention, is that you...
You think like a woman and write like a man.
You were once quoted as having said that.
Is that something you still subscribe to?
I think maybe... Somebody said, you know, why don't you write books more like women writers?
And I said, that's bollocks.
We could kill in the blue.
And just as...
In an opposite sense, Faulkner, whose thought, you know, indeed he is a very convoluted writer, no doubt about it, but some of his tenderness, especially in Light in August and As I Lay Dying.
I'm reading Light in August, by the way, with my 14-year-old daughter, a loud alternating sexist.
But there's a tenderness in it that would be for
in the short-sized brain, thought to be almost a woman's tenderness.
You know, if you read a passage out and said, now, who wrote this, a man or a woman?
There are resonances of Light and August in this new novel, to a degree, aren't there?
Certainly thematic.
Well, the jump cut to this...
I think it's his best book, As I Lay Dying.
I have a first edition of it.
Lina.
You're asking about, you know, the hopes for the future.
I would think one of the, if I had access to the men who run the big television networks, because people love to be read to.
It makes them feel childlike again.
They concentrate when they are read to.
I would for five minutes, no more, five minutes every night before the shock of the news, read a piece of text, a piece of Bible, a piece of Gospel, a piece of Shakespeare, a poem of Emily Dickinson's,
a paragraph of Faulkner, whatever, whoever it be, great stuff.
And I honestly think it would bestow people.
Because when you read a book, just as when you're writing a book, except writing a book takes longer, there's no doubt about it, your mind and your being, whatever part of it, I don't know, I don't know scientifically the words, alters.
You reach.
A deeper part of your own self.
Definitely.
Now, it's a restless world and it's a crowded world.
People are tired.
They're tired from everything, you know.
And to concentrate, to even sit and concentrate and read...
Read two pages.
That's all you need to do.
You don't have to read a whole work.
That takes some real discipline.
Or a sonnet.
Or read a sonnet, at least.
Yes.
Helen Zimler, who teaches at Harvard, right over here, is a great poetry critic.
So she said when she got married, her teacher, her mentor said, now, Helen, I know you're going to be preoccupied with other things, but read a poem every day if it's only a sonnet.
Do you know what I'm saying?
Yes.
No, it's true.
It's true, actually.
It's true.
I was in a room the other evening doing a reading and I was sitting in a little inner room and I read a poem.
It was on the wall of Emily Dickens.
God, it was so wonderful, especially before a reading.
It was a poem about hope.
Beautiful poem.
And the idea was that hope was like a feather, you know, that it kind of touched one.
And there was a line in it that said,
Even in the chillest room.
Chillest.
Chillest, yes.
She was fantastic, Emily Dickens.
She was from these parts.
That was she.
Well, you could drive there within about an hour and 20 minutes from here.
And my other great hero from these parts, heroine, hero, whatever we want to call them, is Sylvia Plath.
She knew what she was doing.
Great poet.
She was.
Narrative.
Clearly, your novels are... there's a point to them, but how important is narrative to it?
It seems to me... Very.
Oh, let there be no mistake about its story.
If you think of the great books down the years, that story has to move with a total inevitable...
and ever-gripping momentum.
Bruce does.
I mean, there are long errors and long descriptions, but the pulse of the story moves.
All great books also have a great story, a great sense of a story being told.
Like Lyndon Johnson says, we have to get them in the tent, and then we can preach the sermon.
I think the story gets them in the tent, so to speak.
Yeah, yeah.
Yes, the story is important, very.
And you've done children's books.
I brought one with me that I hope you'll inscribe.
Children as readers, it seems to me, are important to you.
Oh, yes, because they're the most—Prisoners and Children would be the two most devoted readers.
Captain audience.
That's funny.
You have to leave a quarter of it, is that what you're saying?
Yeah, I will.
Because we've only got five minutes, would you inscribe a couple of books?
Sure, sure.
Do you want to ask a few more and then I'll do the book?
Okay.
This has been a very good interview, by the way.
I think this is related to an earlier question.
Do you see yourself creating a corpus?
Is every book that you write part of a
Well, it would be the way one's arms are part of one's body, one's head.
Maybe you're not asking the question correctly.
I did an interview once with Nadine Gordimer, who said that she felt that every book that she writes is kind of like a different view of the same stature.
She said it's kind of like walking into a room and there's a piece of sculpture, and you might walk and look at it from this angle or from that angle.
since you kind of compared all of the books that she writes to different views of the same... I don't know if you subscribe to that or not, but I guess is everything part of one... Everything is a continuum.
What happens is the books, in my own case, become more labyrinthine.
You're in the same universe
But you're breaking through different borders of the psyche, of the inner self, and therefore of the stories you're giving.
Each book is like a stepping stone to the next book.
And it happens, it's a very unconscious process.
All writing is unconscious.
If you were to plan it, it wouldn't be any good at all.
As regards the looking at the same thing, I would put it slightly different.
You look deeper into things with each book because you have to dredge deeper.
The first book is always the easiest.
It's waiting in the wings of your mind to be written.
if you happen to be a writer, the eighth or ninth or tenth or fifteenth book, because the landscape is the same.
The people have maybe multiplied, but some of their passions and their obsessions are rooted in that same place.
So you can't tell the same old story.
You have to give it
a new dynamic.
But they're cousins, you know, it's a tribe.
A tribe of books, I think I would call it.
Henry James, when he brought out the New York edition of his books, and he was supposed to just write prefaces to all of them, he went back and started tinkering with the books themselves, which was kind of funny.
You know, have you ever been tempted, if you had the opportunity,
to go back and rewrite history, so to speak, or do you think all of your books speak for who you were at that particular point when you develop it as a writer?
Most of them do.
There is one book that I did not realize as fully or as organically as I feel I have realized down by the river.
Our house is playing in isolation.
It was called The High Road.
It didn't...
It didn't have its cathartic emotional effect.
So if you're writing it today, you'd write it a lot differently, wouldn't you?
Well, I'd certainly improve it, yes.
I would.
Are you ever tempted to go back?
No, no.
I have too much to do.
But you also believe that completed work is completed work, I guess.
It would somehow be impossible.
So what?
Everyone is allowed one or two mistakes.
And that's in your view.
But I mean, some people might think it's wonderful.
Yes, it's so funny.
The other day someone came up to me and said, I love this book.
It makes me cry.
I said, they all make you cry.
So...
You could pick a better one.
Yeah.
I think we've got a lot of stuff here, believe it or not.
You sure?
Yeah.
I'd love to just take the opportunity.